---
title: How contamination in recycling has put $5Billion trade in danger?
img: container.jpg
thumbnail: container-thumb.jpg
layout: post
---
If you thought contamination in recycling is not a big issue, then, this post might change that opinion. Contamination in recycling has impacted the global recycling industry and put $5 billion business for the US in danger.

Beijing notified the WTO in July this year that it plans to ban the import of 24 varieties of solid waste which includes many types of plastics and paper that the US has been shipping to China for decades. China has cited concern for its environment as the main driver for this ban quoting that hazardous material has been found mixed with the solid waste which poses a threat to its ecology and people’s health. 

Now, let’s quickly understand how this trade happens: A large number of container ships come from China to the US and because of the trade deficit, there is very low demand for space on these ships. Thus, the shipping companies offer huge discounts for the return leg, so much that it is cheaper to send the solid waste to China compared to transporting that waste from Los Angeles to Chicago through rails. This has also driven a rise of recyclers in China which crave for these recyclables which the US has an abundance of.

The announcement of this ban has made the American recyclers nervous as it leaves no time for the transition to move to or explore new platforms. Adam Minter, writer of the “Junkyard Planet” argues that this move might have counter-intuitive effects on China’s ecology. Mentioning that the US waste is cleaner and more appropriate for recycling for the recyclers in China as compared to the waste in China and this ban would drive the recyclers out of business leading to reduced recycling in China. This, in turn, would lead to more waste ending up in landfills and will cause an increase in environmental pollution.

It is worth considering that these major actions around the world which are now affecting trade and economy stem from the issue of contamination in recycling. This points to us that the current infrastructure is not capable of managing the large amount of waste generated and effectively separating the solid recyclable waste from the unwanted and hazardous materials. This situation calls for a point of disposal separation of waste that can separate the waste as it enters the stream. The current system doesn’t allow for effective separation of recyclables from getting contaminated with unwanted materials. Many cities and organizations are making efforts to best sort the trash as it enters the stream by providing different types of receptacles like Landfill, Recycling, Paper etc. but these efforts are not immune to people paying no attention, with lack of time or evens simply confused that if the material in their hand should go to recycling or not. This ultimately leads to recycling getting contaminated and rendered useless for recycling process, thus, ending in Landfills.

At CleanRobotics, we have developed a solution which enables separation of landfill waste from recyclables at the point of disposal. By using Machine Learning, Computer Vision, and AI, we have created a solution that can help avoid these situations which are not only resulting in lost trade for the U.S. but also, creating scenarios which will lead to an increase in environmental pollution.

We urge you to support us in our endeavor to help save the planet. You can help us by sharing this information with your friends and family so that we all take part in making recycling effective or you can also share the article on your social media to help raise awareness about what we are doing at CleanRobotics.

 Alternatively, if you are interested in working with us, please contact us.
